[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed."
Conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist
Jeffrey Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome,
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Our topic today is finding
wisdom on the spiritual path.
My guest is Dr.
Jack Kornfield, who
is a founder of the
Insight Meditation Society
and a founder of the Spirit
Rock Meditation Center
in Marin County, California.
He's author of several books,
including "A Path with a Heart"
and "After the Ecstasy--
The Laundry."
Welcome, Jack.
>> Thank you.
>> It's a pleasure to be with--
>> Happy to be here.
>> Many people who pursue
a spiritual path are drawn
to the idea of enlightenment,
how wonderful to be
an enlightened person.
And we sort of have
a myth about it,
a fairy tale myth as if
once you're enlightened,
then you live
happily ever after.
In your book, you show
that that really is a myth,
and you point out that all of
the great teachers who you've
had the privilege
of working with
seem to have many normal
human problems in their lives
even after they've achieved
states of enlightenment.
>> Well, enlightenment in
one way is a transformation
of the heart, but it's not
necessarily a transformation
of the body or even perhaps
so much of the personality,
so that you become awake,
compassionate, loving, caring,
but it doesn't mean you still
don't have the conditioning
and experiences of your
culture and your time.
Zen master Suzuki Roshi
put it quite nicely,
he said, what we're
after is enlightenment
one moment after another.
To actually live it and
embody it is the task
and not to have
some imaginary state
that we hold our breath
about and say, now I have it,
and not realize that
life itself is a flow,
and to be really
enlightened is to be
able to flow with the changes
of the seasons of life.
>> Mm-hmm.
You imply that that's an
impossible ideal in your book.
>> I actually don't try to
say either way what happens,
because that would be
presumptuous to speak about
someone else.
What I've discovered is that
for the longtime practitioners
and teachers that I've
spoken with, many of them,
they discover that there's
always new learning and things
to deepen their patience,
their compassion, their love.
So rather than seeing
it as a fixed goal,
it becomes the
journey of awakening.
And that's how it's been
for most Western students
and teachers.
>> I think of it, from
reading your book,
as sort of like
being on a tightrope.
There is this point
of perfect balance
and it's ecstatic
when it's achieved,
but you can't live your
whole life up there.
>> Well, that's a
beautiful image.
In a way, whether it's a
tightrope or a bicycle,
you're never actually
in the center.
On the bicycle you're always
moving back and forth,
staying near the
center in some way.
And inwardly in the heart,
there is a real possibility
of freedom no matter what the
circumstances, but sometimes
a new circumstance or
difficulty will come even
for someone very
wise, and they'll
have to adjust and
say, all right,
how do I be with this
in a way that's truly
compassionate and truly free?
>> Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
In your book,
"After the Ecstasy--
The Laundry," it's
a wonderful book
and it's very rich in terms
of the kinds of human problems
people work through,
but I guess I
was drawn to many of the stories
about great spiritual teachers
who had a shadow side to them,
that they had it worked out,
and many of their own
students were unaware of that,
and sometimes painful
experiences resulted because
of abuses in the
spiritual context.
>> The wisest of the
spiritual teachers,
the ones that I've most
admiration for, like his
holiness the Dalai Lama or
Zen master Suzuki Roshi,
they have a humility about them.
The Dalai Lama will say yes,
sometimes I will still even get
angry a little bit,
but then I realize,
what is the use with that?
And I let it go, or Zen master
Suzuki Roshi talked about--
his wife said, actually,
he wasn't enlightened,
she kind of was teasing him.
He said maybe not,
but I have really
learned to live this great
practice, this enlightenment
from one moment after another.
If somebody sets up an ideal
in their own mind of how
a person is supposed
to be, then often
they don't want to look at the
difficulties of their lives.
But the wisest teachers have
more humility than that,
and they say, well, here's
another opportunity to learn,
or here's the place to
deepen this compassion.
And I think that's a more
helpful attitude to almost all
of us who undertake
a spiritual practice.
It doesn't mean that
awakening and enlightenment
is impossible.
What it means is that we have
to embody it and live it day
by day in our relations,
in our community,
even in relation
to our own body.
>> And life always seems to
have a way of challenging us
at our edges.
>> Exactly so.
It's also true that most people
find that their spiritual life
will develop one area before
another, just like there can
be a great Olympic athlete
who's emotionally maybe not
so developed inside, or a
university professor who's
brilliant intellectually, but
maybe has forgotten their body.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> There's a line from James
Joyce where he wrote, Mr.
Duffy lived a short distance
from his body of one character.
And part of meditation
in spiritual life
is to come and respect
this human body
that we've been given.
Part of it is to learn
the nature of the mind.
Some of it is to learn what
the Buddha called right speech,
right action, right
relationships with others.
>> At the same time, the
spiritual cultures that we
have-- for example, Buddhism,
which is several thousands
of years old, have like all
cultural systems formed certain
patterns and maybe become
rigid in certain ways.
You point out, for example,
in some traditions,
it's simply not acceptable
to talk about your problems
or to focus on perhaps
ailments of the body.
>> Certainly so.
And in cultures where I
lived and loved my experience
in Asia, in Burma or
Thailand or India or Japan,
there are culturally things
that it's proper to talk about
and some that are kept private.
But whether private or not,
if we're to be really free,
we have to learn to
be as free in our care
for this physical body as
we are free in our thoughts
or in the mind.
And what I discovered
in interviewing
teachers and masters is
that they would find,
as they matured
in spiritual life,
places that they were
still frightened,
is still unconscious,
and those became
the base of their practice.
One beautiful nun who
had been a Tibetan nun
for many, many years had
ecstatic meditations,
then she got cancer,
and she realized
that she had used her body
but not loved or inhabited it
in a wise or healing way.
And she said, I had to
change my spiritual life
to include this physical
body in the same way
that I had included the
ecstasies of the meditation.
>> Now you yourself have
gone through some interesting
transitions on your path.
At one time you were
a monk in a monastery.
>> That's correct, and it was
one of the most both beautiful
and inspiring times of
my life to spend years
in the monastery.
Then something
inside in my own life
felt I needed to come
back to the West.
I was very much drawn
to marriage and family
and relationship, and I
asked my teacher about it,
and he said, in marriage
and family and relationship,
you will also find
plenty of opportunity
to practice patience,
to practice compassion,
to understand the wisdom of
letting go and generosity
just as you do in the monastery.
So don't stop your
practice or think
that it's low class practice.
That, too, is a place to awaken.
>> Mm-hmm.
And along the way you
learned some lessons perhaps
you hadn't expected.
>> Well, I think that we all do.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> I certainly learned
lessons in parenting.
In the monastery, if they
ring the bell at 3:00
in the morning to get up
and meditate and chant
as they used to do, if
you're really tired,
you can kind of roll over
and say, well maybe tomorrow.
But when your child
wakes up in the middle
of the night sick and
crying, this little baby,
you have no choice.
You get up and you tend
to this sick child.
And so there is a level
of surrender and openness
that was required in parenting
or in being a partner
and being a husband that
was in some ways more
demanding and equally inspiring
as being in the monastery.
And frankly equally difficult.
>> Mm-hmm.
There's a very poignant
story in your book
about the clash you
had with your wife
having to do with the concept
of goddesses in every woman.
>> Yes.
Well, you know how
when we start to have
a relationship-- and this
was early in my marriage
after the first year or so.
I was still hoping my
wife, who is naturally
a kind of introverted and
quiet person and artist
and a very deep
spiritual being, I
was hoping that she would
become more like me,
more extroverted and more
social and things like that.
And somewhere in
the back of my mind,
even though I wasn't
thinking about it,
my hope was that
she would change,
even though we're
drawn to our opposites,
I was going to change her.
And then one day we were
walking in the Zen Center,
and she'd had me read a book
about various goddesses,
and I said, well I could
relate to Aphrodite,
she's this very
wonderful goddess,
and Athena, the
goddess of wisdom,
the goddess of Aphrodite,
of beauty and so forth.
Hestia I'm not sure about.
She's sort of the hearth
and home, the invisible one.
And my wife looked at me and
she said, what do you mean?
That's me.
I knew you'd never loved me!
And she took the
book out of my hand
and threw it down
and went off crying,
and I actually felt
very bad, because I
realized in some unconscious
way, early in the marriage
I was still--
I loved her, but I was still
hoping she'd change and be more
the way I wanted her to be.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And in that moment,
I realized the truth
of relationship, that we have
to love each other as we are.
And in fact, that's the only
thing that frees the heart,
is to see us--
each of us in our
uniqueness and to discover
what the Buddha
called the great heart
of compassion, the great
heart of loving kindness.
It doesn't mean that you can't
speak out against difficulty
or injustice or accommodate
for another person,
but true love isn't about
attachment or having someone
be different any more
than true meditation is
about grasping and struggling.
It's really opening to
see the way things are
and bringing that great
compassion to the circumstance.
>> Jack, we're going
to take a short break.
We'll be back.
We're back.
I'm talking with Dr. Jack
Kornfield about wisdom
on the spiritual path.
Jack, in your book,
"After the Ecstasy--
The Laundry," you
refer to a time
in which you convened a group
of Buddhist spiritual teachers
from many different
Buddhist traditions.
>> Yes.
>> And from all over the--
>> We've had a series of
meetings this last year.
We had 220 Buddhist teachers
from around the world
together with the Dalai Lama
and other great Zen masters
and so forth at our center
in Spirit Rock in California.
And it was a beautiful
gathering because there's so
many different expressions
and voices, some
who represent a kind
of spacious emptiness,
others who were very much
spiritual activists who
want to take the
wisdom of the Buddha
and work for the environment
to save the rainforests.
And so it was beautiful
to hear the different ways
that the inner spiritual
life expressed itself
through these teachers.
>> Mm-hmm.
And I think it must be
awesome when you consider
a community like that,
thousands of years
old, doing good work for so
long and in so many places.
>> It was very beautiful
to get people together.
One of the best parts
was to see that since it
was more Western teachers
than Asian teachers
here in the West, that there
were as many women teachers
as men, which is a shift
in the way Buddhism--
Buddhist wisdom is being carried
in this culture, and quite
a beautiful one.
The Dalai Lama was really happy
and celebratory about that,
as were some of the
other of the wise elders.
It wouldn't be as easily
possible in Tibet or Burma yet,
those cultures are
very slowly changing.
But here in America,
there's no way to stop it,
and it's one of the
most beautiful things
to see a whole group of very
wise and impressive teachings
and teachers come from the
women who've been practicing
for all these years.
>> And yet you
described a moment--
it touched me--
when the Dalai Lama
himself was moved to tears
listening to the pain
that some of these
women described
and being recognized and
accepted as Buddhist teachers.
>> Yes, especially there was
one woman who told a story about
how hard it was for Tibetan
women and for herself
as a Western Tibetan nun,
but it's also true in Burma
or Thailand and places.
And she's talked
about the longing
that the women she was
with had to have teachings
and to realize their
own Buddha nature,
and how much struggle it was,
how little support they got.
And the Dalai Lama put his
head in his hands and he wept.
And he said, I didn't realize
it was this difficult.
I will do everything
I can to help
facilitate the
access to teachings
and support for women.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> One of the other things
that we talked about in that
meeting, the
question was raised,
what is different in Western
culture for Buddhist teachers?
And we talked a
lot about how there
is a kind of self-judgment
and unworthiness
that is endemic to our culture.
And the Dalai Lama
said, could we explain?
We talked about self-hatred.
And he said, self-hatred?
He had to have it
translated three times.
He said, we don't have
that in Tibetan culture.
What-- you mean people
really hate themselves?
And we talked about
how many people
will come to a spiritual
path bearing the wounds
or the difficulties of
their life or the judgments
that they've placed
on themselves,
and how little mercy people
have for themselves not
to speak of one another.
So that the whole way
we've been practicing
has needed to be shifted to
be grounded in loving kindness
and compassion first.
Before we even look at what
is the nature of the mind,
we have to learn to
be kind to ourselves.
Because if you're not kind to
yourself or those around you,
you can't even begin
to look honestly.
So it was a very revealing
and helpful conversation.
>> Well, it strikes me
that here in the West,
we have a tradition
of psychotherapy.
You yourself are educated
as a psychotherapist,
and my experience in
traveling in Asia--
big cities like Hong
Kong, psychotherapy
is still almost unknown.
>> Yes.
The kind of therapy, if
you will, that's offered
is through Buddhist
practice and so forth.
And there's a very
wonderful dimension.
One can train oneself in loving
kindness and forgiveness that
are deeply therapeutic.
And on a meditation
retreat, you can really
do a great deal of healing.
The gift that
psychotherapy has brought
is to put two people
together that allows someone
to ask you the questions that
take you even deeper that you
might shy away from in your own
meditation that might be too
difficult. So the
Buddhist principles
of forgiveness or compassion
are very much compatible
with Western psychotherapy,
and there is a real interest
even among Buddhist
teachers into how
to borrow what's a value from
the Western tradition that's
compatible with the fundamental
understanding of liberation,
of enlightenment.
>> I wonder, though, in
Asian countries, like Tibet,
for example, the
self-hatred is--
it's expressed in
the West might also
be their people might
come from families where
as children they've
been mistreated,
but they don't have a
culture of talking about it
or thinking about
it the way we do.
>> Some of that might be true,
but there's another side.
If you go and look in a
Tibetan refugee village where
they've lost their country,
their religion and culture have
been destroyed by
the Communist army
and so forth there, they've
lost their economic base,
the children are so
beautiful and so happy,
because it's a
culture that still
has the wisdom of
holding the children
and caring for them-- they're
not being raised by television
and daycare and
the kind of things
where we don't
tend to the growing
spirit of our young ones.
So that there really is less
unhappiness in some ways
among the children
in those cultures
because they still
carry the old wisdom.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And it's something that I
think we need to bring back
in not just to bring people
to meditation to find this
awakening themselves, but
to start when we're young
and remind that we can raise
our children in a more beautiful
and organic way.
>> Mm-hmm.
Well, Buddhism I find especially
interesting because it
has withstood so many tests
over the thousands of years,
and in so many
different cultures
it has adapted and found--
built true authentic
community it seems to me.
And in the context
of community, I
guess there is this opportunity
to integrate and to be
critical of various problems
that come along where it seems,
in a sense and in the West,
this idea of spiritual community
is sort of a new thing.
>> I'm not sure if
it's new or not.
It's central to Christian
and Jewish belief,
although it may not
be practiced always.
And it's certainly
central in Buddhism.
We need one another.
We are not independent,
but we're interdependent.
And whether it's the environment
or the care for our children
and their care for
our cities, the sense
of attending
spiritually is critical.
The whole vision of
a Western society
where everyone is independent--
one person in a car has
now crowded our roadways,
and everybody getting their gas
is now ruining the atmosphere,
the transformation that's
needed from the Buddhist
teachings' perspective--
but really,
from any place of wisdom--
is that we look at each
other as part of a whole.
And that is central
to Buddhist wisdom.
The other thing that
central is reminding people
that it's possible for
their heart to be free
no matter how difficult
their circumstances.
So I had a Cambodian teacher
after the great tragedies
in Cambodia who walked on
foot through all the war
zones teaching people loving
kindness and forgiveness
and saying that without
forgiveness, our hearts can
never be free.
And he was-- they
tried to shoot him
and they were hand
grenades rolled out
to his walking, a group
of monks and so forth,
But they walked anyway.
He said, if we don't
learn forgiveness,
what good is it to
be on this Earth?
So there is a transformation of
the heart that any human being
can find our Buddha nature,
our true nature even
in times of difficulty.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> What we have in the
West-- why I use that phrase,
that spiritual community
seems like a new thing to us,
obviously we have
ancient religions,
but it seems in our culture
that there's-- people do make
a distinction, that they find
it a valid distinction between
religion and spirituality.
>> Religion, you could say,
is the organized outer form.
Spirituality, at
least in my language,
means the awakening of
an individual's heart.
And religion provides vehicles,
but it doesn't have the spirit
unless the spirit
comes into a person
or into a group of people.
So whether it's an
individual or a group,
the idea is really to become
a Buddha and not a Buddhist.
The idea is to discover--
to shift from the
small sense of self,
what we call the body
of fear, and to awaken
the natural generosity and
compassion and goodness
that we're born with that
may have been covered over
to use meditation or whatever
tools there are of service
and so forth to bring
us back in touch
with that love that is our
original or our Buddha nature.
>> Mm-hmm.
One might say in a
Christian context,
the ideal would
then be to become
Christ rather than a Christian.
>> Absolutely.
Or to follow what
Christ did and what
he taught rather than saying,
this is to be a Christian
and those people aren't,
to love your neighbor,
to turn the other cheek,
to care for the poor.
That's a true Christian.
>> Mm-hmm.
And in the--
>> And a true Buddhist.
>> Yeah.
In the process of doing
those difficult tasks,
we always run up against, I
guess, our own inequalities
that we bring to it.
>> Yes, and that's the
place of transformation.
And one of the beautiful
things in Buddhist teaching
is that the meditations of
forgiveness or of compassion
that one does over and over,
the meditations of awareness
so that we see the
fears and the confusions
and discover how to
step outside of them.
There are a lot of
systematic trainings
that help us in
those difficulties
so that we can really
learn to be free.
We can trust, we can rest
in that awakened heart.
>> Mm-hmm.
Jack Kornfield,
what a pleasure it
is sharing these aspects
of the path with you.
Thanks so much
for being with me.
>> It's been a pleasure
for me, too, thank you.
>> It's been a pleasure.
And thank you for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]